QC 27129
Leaving the workforce
If you're leaving the workforce because you are retiring,
there are a range of options for making the transition.
Planning to retire
Find out what you need to consider when planning to retire.
Consider when you can access your super and the tax payable.
Transition to retirement
Find out how you may be able to reduce your working hours
without reducing your income.
Accessing your super to retire
Find out how and when you can access your super to fund your
retirement.
Approved early retirement schemes
Find out how an early retirement scheme encourages certain
groups or classes of employees to retire early or resign.
Planning to retire
On this page
Before you retire
Payments leading into retirement
After you retire
Employee share schemes
CGT retirement exemption for small business
Before you retire
If you're planning to retire, you need to consider:
your age, including if you have reached your preservation age
your super
how much tax you will pay on amounts you receive
if good leaver conditions apply if you are part of an employee share
scheme
if the retirement capital gains tax concession applies if you sell your
small business.
Special rules apply if you receive an employment termination payment,
genuine redundancy payment or payments from an approved early
retirement scheme.
If you're leaving your job for other reasons, such as termination,
change of industry or leaving Australia, the tax on payments you
receive may be different.
Payments leading into retirement
Find out what you need to consider when planning to
retire. Consider when you can access your super and the
tax payable.
Last updated 9 June 2025
If you receive a lump sum payment from your employer for unused
annual or long service leave, you may pay tax on it at a lower rate than
your other income. Your employer will report any lump sum payments
at either 'Lump sum A' or 'Lump sum B' on your income statement or
payment summary. You will need these details when you prepare your
tax return.
A genuine redundancy payment is a payment made to you usually
because the job you have been doing has been abolished. These
payments are tax-free to a limit depending on the number of years you
worked for that employer.
Your employer may offer staff an early retirement scheme to
encourage certain groups of employees to retire early or resign. You
may pay less tax on payments you receive under an early retirement
scheme.
After you retire
Once you retire, you can access a number of tax offsets, such as:
seniors and pensioners tax offset
superannuation income stream tax offset.
If you have income from an Australian superannuation income stream,
you may be able to claim a tax offset if you're:
receiving a disability superannuation benefit
receiving a death benefit income stream
60 or over.
Employee share schemes
If you are a member of an employee share scheme (ESS), you need to
consider the 'good leaver' conditions. Good leaver conditions in an
ESS may allow employees to retain ESS interests if they cease
employment to retire from the workforce permanently during the
forfeiture period.
Whether ESS interests acquired under an ESS with good leaver
conditions are at a real risk of forfeiture will depend on the facts and
circumstances. This includes how the ESS operates and the
employee's personal circumstances.
CGT retirement exemption for small
business
If you are selling your small business assets, the capital gains tax
retirement concession may apply. The retirement concession can
exempt a capital gain on a business asset, up to a lifetime retirement
exemption limit of $500,000. This concession allows you to provide for
your retirement.
If you choose the retirement exemption, there is no requirement to
terminate any activity or cease business.
If you are under 55 years old just before you choose to use the
retirement exemption, you must make a personal contribution equal to
the exempt amount to a complying superannuation fund or a
retirement savings account.
QC 31878
On this page
Transition to retirement rules
Super guarantee contributions and TRIS
Transition to retirement rules
Under the transition to retirement rules, when you reach your
preservation age, you may be able to reduce your working hours
without reducing your income. You can do this by choosing to start a
transition to retirement income stream (TRIS).
Transition to retirement
Find out how you may be able to reduce your working
hours without reducing your income.
Last updated 9 June 2025
The TRIS payment tops up your part-time income with a regular
'income stream' from your super savings. Previously, you could only
access your super once you were 65 years old or retired.
For more information on the changes to transition to retirement income
streams from 1 July 2017, see GN 2019/1 – Changes to transition-toretirement income streams.
Under these rules, you can only access your super benefits as a 'noncommutable' income stream. A non-commutable income stream is one
that you can't convert into a lump sum. This generally means you can't
take your benefits as a lump sum cash payment while you are still
working. You must take your super benefits as regular payments.
Super guarantee contributions and TRIS
Employers still need to make compulsory super guarantee
contributions for all their eligible employees. This includes people on a
TRIS.
We recommend you seek financial advice when considering:
super withdrawal options
how tax applies to your retirement, transition to retirement or
superannuation income streams.
If a TRIS is not in the retirement phase:
the earnings from the assets supporting the TRIS will not be eligible
for exempt current pension income (ECPI), and will be taxed at the
relevant tax rate
it will not count towards your transfer balance cap (until it goes into
the retirement phase).
A TRIS isn't in the retirement phase until you meet one of the following
conditions of release:
you're 65 years old or older
retirement
permanent incapacity
terminal medical condition.
QC 31882
On this page
When you can access your super
Preservation age
Tax on super benefits
When you can access your super
When you reach your preservation age and retire, you can access your
super to fund your retirement.
You can also access your super:
when you turn 65 years old
under the transition to retirement rules (if you are eligible), while
you continue to work.
You don't have to cash out your super just because you've reached a
certain age. However, you need to check if the rules of your super fund
specify otherwise.
Preservation age
Your preservation age is not the same as your pension age. Your
preservation age is the age you must reach before you can access
your super and depends on when you were born.
If you are 60 years old or older your super payments may be tax free.
You may receive your super benefits as:
Accessing your super to retire
Find out how and when you can access your super to fund
your retirement.
Last updated 9 June 2025
a super income stream
a super lump sum
a combination of both.
If you're 60 years old or older and your only source of income is super
benefits from a taxed source, you won't need to lodge a tax return.
You will need to lodge a tax return if you have income from other
sources or if you have tax withheld on your PAYG payment summary –
superannuation income stream. This includes investments or some
public sector super funds.
Tax on super benefits
The tax payable on super benefits depends on a number of things,
including:
your age
the amount of the payment
whether you receive your super benefits as a super income stream
or a super lump sum
whether your super comes from a taxed or untaxed source.
Some super benefits have a tax-free component and a taxable
component. The tax-free component generally includes:
amounts you have contributed to your super fund without claiming
those amounts as a tax deduction
certain other tax-free amounts you may have rolled into your super
fund.
We recommend you seek financial advice when considering:
super withdrawal options
how tax applies to your retirement, transition to retirement or
superannuation income streams.
QC 27130
On this page
What is an approved early retirement scheme?
Tax on an early retirement scheme payment
What is an approved early retirement
scheme?
An approved early retirement scheme is a payment which is tax-free to
a limit. These schemes are put in place by employers to encourage
certain groups or classes of employees to retire early or resign.
For employees to get special concessional tax rates, the Commissioner
of Taxation must approve the scheme before payments start.
Tax on an early retirement scheme
payment
The tax-free amount of the early retirement scheme payments
depends on the number of years you worked for your employer. The
tax-free limit is a whole dollar amount, plus an amount for each whole
year of service with that employer. Indexation changes the tax-free
limit on 1 July each year.
The tax-free amount is not part of your employment termination
payment (ETP). Any payment amount over the tax-free limit is treated
as an ETP.
The concessional taxation treatment for genuine redundancy and early
retirement scheme payments now extends to individuals who are
Approved early retirement
schemes
Find out how an early retirement scheme encourages
certain groups or classes of employees to retire early or
resign.
Last updated 9 June 2025
Our commitment to you
We are committed to providing you with accurate, consistent and clear
information to help you understand your rights and entitlements and meet
your obligations.
If you follow our information and it turns out to be incorrect, or it is
misleading and you make a mistake as a result, we will take that into
account when determining what action, if any, we should take.
Some of the information on this website applies to a specific financial year.
This is clearly marked. Make sure you have the information for the right year
before making decisions based on that information.
If you feel that our information does not fully cover your circumstances, or
you are unsure how it applies to you, contact us or seek professional
advice.
Copyright notice
© Australian Taxation Office for the Commonwealth of Australia
You are free to copy, adapt, modify, transmit and distribute this material as
you wish (but not in any way that suggests the ATO or the Commonwealth
endorses you or any of your services or products).
65 years of age or older, if they are dismissed or retire before they
reach pension age. This applies to payments made on or after 1 July
2019. Before 1 July 2019 this tax treatment only applied to individuals
under 65 years old.
You need to be wary of Illegal super schemes people offer to help you
gain access to your super savings before you reach your preservation
age. Heavy penalties apply if you participate in these schemes.
QC 27131